---
layout: post
title: Craftsmanship and the Role of Mentoring
date: '2014-07-12T17:02:00.001-07:00'
author: William Berry
tags:
- Craftsmanship
- Mentoring
- Development
- software
modified_time: '2014-07-13T13:30:35.092-07:00'
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-4707687462195457004.post-4161369035704331615
blogger_orig_url: http://www.lucidmotions.net/2014/07/craftsmanship-and-role-of-mentoring.html
---

Dear Diary, 

I had a really rough ride this morning.  The climb was beautiful and I had 
some killer ideas as the pedals spun in time with the AD/DC thumping in my 
headphones.  The descent was epic.  The flow, balance and focus was 
unwavering. Unfortunately, on my way home things shifted and my mind began to 
clutter.  I passed under the 241, caught a rut and went down like a sack of 
potatoes.  As I lay there assessing myself for injuries ... bleeding abrasion 
on the knee, cut on the arm, covered in dust, mangled handlebars and a bruised 
ego as the skater kids smoking pot under the bridge re-enacted my demise ... I 
had an epiphany. 

<div style="text-align: center;">*** 
I will eagerly admit that software is thought work.  We developers spend our 
days solving problems, pushing glyphs from our minds through our fingers and 
onto compilers.  In some ways the work is decidedly different from our 
counterparts in the trades.  But in other ways, are we really that far removed 
from the carpenter, or plumber, or welder, or mason? 

For me, the strongest union between the classical trades and software 
development is the notion of craftsmanship.  In all cases, there is a final 
work product that reflects design choices, and quality of execution.  Earlier 
today I tweeted a vary common phrase that most all, in the trades, know dearly 
... 
<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" lang="en">It's the poor craftsman that 
blames the tool. 
â€” William Berry (@williamberryiii) [July 12, 
2014](https://twitter.com/williamberryiii/statuses/487998627978416128)</blockquote><script 
async="" charset="utf-8" src="//platform.twitter.com/widgets.js"></script> 
Having been in both the trades and software, it seems to me that developers 
spend an awful lot of time griping about their tools, from text editors to 
IDEs to automation, etc.  And to alleviate any further skepticism, I will 
fully admit to having blamed plenty of tools, even the ones I have built, for 
their poor quality.  That said ... I still whole heartily believe in the the 
phrase above. 

Because this is the age of the internet, and on the internet you can always 
find someone who says you are wrong ... I took to Google to find some 
dissenting opinions.  Take this wonderful shot at inverting the colloquial 
phrase: 

[It's (Not) a Poor Craftsman Who Blames His Tools](http://It's (Not) a Poor 
Craftsman Who Blames His Tools) 

The article and quite a few comments, attempt to claim that an expensive table 
saw will produce better results than a cheap one; and to the apprentice or 
journeyman, that sentiment is absolutely true.  The problem, is that the core 
assumption is false and it willingly neglects to consider all the pieces in 
motion. 

Every project, from your kitchen cabinets to your bug tracking software, comes 
down to the interplay of finished quality, time and materials (inclusive of 
money).  If the client is interested in a finer product, that will require 
either more time or better materials and possibly both.  True craftsman have 
mastered the interplay of these elements within their given trade.  Let's look 
at an example ... 

I have been bugging my wife about getting a custom cabinet built for this nook 
under the stairs that we have.  I really want a book shelf and sun bench with 
storage, for that area (dog toys, legos, books, etc.).  Now bear in mind that 
both my wife and I are finish carpenters.  We have spent extensive time making 
everything from crappy single sided theatrical cabinetry to finely crafted 
hand hewn furniture.  We are both equally skilled in joinery; yet, we are 
looking to hire someone to do this work. Why? 

Well for starters, we do not have the appropriate tooling ... no Delta Cabinet 
saw, no stacked dado head cutting tools, no pneumatics.  Hell, we don't even 
have any glue.  So, we are effectively missing all the tools of our trade to 
complete the job. 

But is that really true? 

I have some screws, and nails, and a Japanese pull saw.  I could still buy the 
best wood and save the expense of proper tooling by crafting jigs and fences 
and a whole host of small devices that would enable me, as the master of my 
craft, to utilize the tools I currently have to complete the job to any level 
of satisfaction.  The question is, am I willing to spend the time and money to 
build the devices that make the incorrect tools function properly within this 
context. 

Well save the suspense, the answer is no.  I would much rather hire someone 
that has purchased the proper tooling to do this job quickly.  I get a high 
quality product, with choice materials, in less time.   I have made the 
decision that my time is more expensive than the cost of materials and someone 
else's time, for the level of quality I desire. 

All this said, I am not the craftsman here ... the cabinetmaker I hired is.  I 
have brought them in to asses the project.  I have given requirements such as 
materials, a delivery date and an anticipated budget.  The cabinetmaker will 
then decide, given my requirements and their assessment of tooling, whether or 
not the work can be completed within my constraints. 

One might clammer quickly to mention that the skills of the cabinetmaker are 
also at play here, and I would agree only to say that skill is a function of 
time.  The cabinetmaker may recognize that my request for butterfly joints in 
the bench top is not a technique they have used before, nor are they properly 
tooled to craft such a fancy bit of joinery.  That factor, time to learn how 
to do the joint and the tooling to cut it properly, may end up in the quote 
from the cabinetmaker ... but it also might not. 

The craftsman, will see my request for this new joint as an opportunity to 
learn a new skill, build the proper tooling such that they can offer this 
capability to other clients.  They may also recognize that it is not 
necessarily my responsibility to pay them to learn how to craft this fancy bit 
of joinery. 

If the craftsman would like to have me cover the cost of adding butterfly 
joint capacity to their shop by supporting training and in the construction of 
associated tooling, they should inform me of that; and I, as the client, have 
the option to accept the added cost or find another cabinetmaker. 

Perhaps, I recognize that investing now in bolstering the craftsman's tooling 
and skills could save me significant money later, when I have them build my 
kitchen table; but I won't know that, if they don't inform me of it. 

So where is this cabinet making post going? 

The situation presented here is not unlike the day to day interaction between 
a developer and a business.  The developer is presented with requirements and 
it is their job to asses the situation and inform the business of the pieces 
in play.  Experience and skill both play a factor in the quality of this 
assessment.  Note that experience and skill are both a function of time. 

A good craftsman, communicates effectively with the business to help them 
balance time, materials and quality.  The craftsman will also recognize that 
the acquisition of new skills or tooling may or may not be the responsibility 
of the business, depending on who is getting the most value out of the 
training.  If the acquisition of new skills or tooling is ultimately of 
greater benefit to the craftsman, then it is their responsibility to spend 
personal time and materials to acquire the skills.  Let me repeat that .... 
<blockquote>If the acquisition of new skills or tooling is ultimately of 
greater benefit to the craftsman, then it is their responsibility to spend 
personal time and materials to acquire the skills. </blockquote>This assertion 
comes down more on the side of experience than that of skill; but, in terms of 
business value, it is still a function of time.  My assertion here is that the 
distinction between "poor" vs, let's say, "good" craftsmanship is in the 
expenditure of time; let's take a look at a specific example: 

If you were alive in the 90's, I would suspect that you remember The New 
Yankee Workshop with Norm Abram (we may have had different childhoods).  If 
you don't, or its been a while since you last saw it ... I highly recommend at 
least checking out the following episode which is broken into two parts. 

[New Yankee Workshop - Building Jigs Part 
I](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7Lc6ItDd7Q0) 
[New Yankee Workshop - Building Jigs Part 
II](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_HGwODXgLBo) 

In this episode, Norm spends an hour of broadcast time, several days of 
filming, building jigs for various projects.  Construction of even the 
simplest of these can take over an hour to manufacture, and some of the more 
complex ones, perhaps even a full day.  So why is Norm, unquestionably a 
master craftsman, spending all day to make a jig that he will use for a single 
30 second cut? I posit that the poor craftsman blames the tool because they 
have failed to recognize the extent and importance of their personal role, 
i.e. their time, in tooling up properly for a job.  That also implies that 
poor does not mean bad, but simply inexperienced. 

Perhaps our affinity in software to blame our tools, is simply because we are 
missing something that the trades, and even medicine, have long known? 

Question: What do physicians call their businesses? 

Answer: A Practice. 

Why? 

Why would you call, what you do for a living ... a "Practice"? Well, it's 
because that is exactly what they are doing ... practicing medicine.  It's an 
ownership of the novice state.  An understanding that mastery has not yet, and 
may never, be completely achieved. 

So let's take a look at the carer path of a physician. 

Know what physicians do right after receiving their graduate degrees?  They 
intern. Why?  Because they may have the knowledge, but not the skills to 
practice medicine. 

Know what physicians do after they intern?  A residency, where they spend 
several years beginning to practice medicine under the watchful eye of an even 
more skilled physician. 

Know how long this process takes? Example: Neurological Surgery ... 6 YEARS. 

This tiered level of graduation in medicine was taken directly from the 
trades, where in a guild one apprentices, then achieves journeyman, and then 
is finally granted the title of master of craft. 

In software, we happily support novice programmers who write code for critical 
infrastructure, payment systems, etc. without a second thought.  As software 
eats the world ... does this make you feel warm and fuzzy inside? 

Our industry is new ... carpenters and masons have been at this for thousands 
of years and we, as members of the software industry, need to learn from their 
experience.  Hell, even modern medicine has done so, to quite significant 
success. 

Software business need to understand that their developers may not be 
craftsman ... i.e. have the skills or experience to inform management that 
they are actually ill equipped to perform their jobs.  They may posses the 
knowledge to complete the task, but not the skills to properly build the 
software.  While throwing the bird from the nest may be the only way they will 
learn to fly; surprise, writing software is not a natural human instinct. 

Extreme Programming, with its concept of pair programming has been a small 
step in the right direction.  Sit two, close but unequally matched developers 
down to complete a task together.  The interaction benefits both parties as 
they learn and bolster their skill sets; the delivered product is typically 
much better off ... this is a form of mentoring. 

Mentoring does not need to be 100% of the time; I am pretty sure that 
Aristotle spent some time by himself thinking without the help of Plato.  
Nonetheless, business that invest in the infrastructure to support pairing 
are, by de facto, building and supporting mentoring programs. 

In this time of plenty, when developers can do what they want and for who they 
want, we need to focus on upping our game.  We need to create the 
infrastructure that will make software a sustainable, diverse and supportive 
industry. 

We need to introspect and asses our own level of skill ... are we craftsman? 
If so, what role are we playing in building up and mentoring the junior 
developers. 

Are our businesses invested in education, and tooling?  If not, is it our 
responsibility as craftsman to seek out further education and build needed 
tooling on our own accord; taking that knowledge and those tools to the junior 
developers, so that all within the craft may benefit? 

Can we endeavor to give the inexperienced developers in our industry, no 
reason to blame their tools? 