---
layout: post
title: ETA 30 min.
date: '2015-04-22T22:31:00.002-07:00'
author: William Berry
tags:
- Free Writing
- Random
modified_time: '2015-04-22T22:31:31.177-07:00'
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-4707687462195457004.post-2840658534053014727
blogger_orig_url: http://www.lucidmotions.net/2015/04/eta-30-min.html
---

I'm gonna miss the keynote aren't I? 
Google maps puts me 25 min to the Bossanova with light traffic. 
Parking's gonna be a mess.  Jim and I looked around yesterday and there was 
nothing for folks without a "Zone G" permit.  I wonder if Portland lets you 
buy a permit online. Gah! For a tech-centric city, this site's a mess. 
Where are my keys? 
Better question - where are my pants? 
OK, kick off this test run, grab breakfast and boogie. 
Hair looks sharp. Shirt is buttoned. Laptop in bag, phone charged, let's roll. 
Shoot! 
Where ... are ... my ... pants? 
Alright, pat-down, got everything finally. 
Now food. 
Oh. Wow. I must say this is quite a delightful breakfast for a roadside 
Comfort Inn reminiscent of the the Timberline Lodge. Eggs, sausage and an 
English muffin. This ought to soak up last night, maybe? 
Keys, coffee, extra croissant, directions. 
Cool. 
The Eagle - haven't heard this since Sacramento, love this station. 
Where to park?  With all these spaces, you'd think they would put in metered 
parking. Here take my money, is it not green enough?  Ooooh, residential 
parking, no signs, few blocks away. Perfect! 
Right. Three very steep flights of stairs. Oof. 
Need more coffee. 
Where's my Advil? 
Crap, Sebastian is the first talk, this ought to be a roller. Seriously, where 
is my Advil.  "Because beer" - yup that about sums it up. 